new article (#16)
Cogitri/cogitri.github.io: content/posts/11-alpine-dev-env-in-fedora.md

---
title: "Creating an Alpine Developer Environment for Fedora Silverblue"
date: 2020-12-27T21:57:24-03:00
draft: false
---

> Article by editor Leo <thinkabit.ukim@gmail.com>

As readers know I'm a developer for [Alpine Linux][1], it is a very nice simple distribution for running containers.

> Unforunately it is not very nice when using GNOME, it has less developers than other distros and its integration isn't as good as the more popular distros like Debian and Fedora.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Unforunately it is not very nice when using GNOME, it has less developers than other distros and its integration isn't as good as it is in the more popular distros like Debian and Fedora.
```

> With that in mind I have decided to test [Fedora Silverblue][2], a flavour of Fedora with GNOME that uses [libostree][3] to provide reliable upgrades and rollbacks of the operating system, allowing the user to overlay their own packages on top and using container technologies (like [podman][4] and [toolbox][5]) to provide an alternative to installing packages onto the system itself.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With that in mind I have decided to test [Fedora Silverblue][2], a flavour of Fedora with GNOME that uses [OSTree][3] to provide reliable upgrades and rollbacks of the operating system, allowing the user to overlay their own packages on top and using container technologies (like [podman][4] and [toolbox][5]) to provide an alternative to installing packages onto the system itself.
```

---

> title: "Creating an Alpine Developer Environment for Fedora Silverbluee"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: "Creating an Alpine Developer Environment for Fedora Silverblue"
```

date: 2020-12-27T21:57:24-03:00
draft: false
---

> Article by editor Leo <thinkabit.ukim@gmail.com>

As readers know I'm a developer for [Alpine Linux][1], it is a very nice simple distribution for running containers.

> Unforunately it is not very nice when using GNOME, it has less developers than other distros and its integration isn't as good as the main distros like Debian and Fedora.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Unforunately it is not very nice when using GNOME, it has less developers than other distros and its integration isn't as good as it is on the usual GNOME distros like Debian and Fedora.
```

With that in mind I have decided to test [Fedora Silverblue][2], a flavour of Fedora with GNOME that uses [libostree][3] to provide reliable upgrades and rollbacks of the operating system, allowing the user to overlay their own packages on top and using container technologies (like [podman][4] and [toolbox][5]) to provide an alternative to installing packages onto the system itself.

In this article I'll describe the process of creating an [Alpine Linux][1] image to be used in podman and accessed via SSH or `podman exec`, while taking into account the peculirarities of working from inside toolbox.

<!--more-->

## Dockerfile

The first thing we need is the image itself, so lets write a `Dockerfile` that has:

- `alpine-sdk` (equivalent to `build-essentials`), `alpine-conf`, `abuild`, `sudo` and `openssh-server`

> - also `fish` (because I like a nice interactive shell)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `fish` (because I like a nice interactive shell)
```

- It must have a SSH Daemon configuration that exposes a port for us to use
- Has Hostkeys generated

```dockerfile
FROM alpine:edge
MAINTAINER Leo <thinkabit.ukim@gmail.com>

RUN rm /etc/apk/repositories \
    && printf -- >> /etc/apk/repositories \
    'http://dl-cdn.alpinelinux.org/alpine/edge/%s\n' \
    main community testing

RUN apk add -U --no-cache \
    alpine-conf \
    alpine-sdk \
    abuild \
    sudo \
    openssh-server \
    fish
RUN apk upgrade -a
RUN setup-apkcache /var/cache/apk

RUN /usr/bin/ssh-keygen -A
RUN printf "Port %%PORT%%\nListenAddress localhost\n" >> /etc/ssh/sshd_config

USER root

CMD ["/usr/sbin/sshd", "-D"]
```

> Slightly daunting, lets break it down into simpler pieces and expose them separately.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Slightly daunting, lets break it down into simpler pieces and explain them one-by-one.
```

---

```Dockerfile
FROM alpine:edge
MAINTAINER Leo <thinkabit.ukim@gmail.com>
```

Use the `edge` image from Alpine Linux and set myself as maintainer.

```Dockerfile
RUN rm /etc/apk/repositories \
    && printf -- >> /etc/apk/repositories \
    'http://dl-cdn.alpinelinux.org/alpine/edge/%s\n' \
    main community testing
```

> Delete previous configuration and enable `main`, `community` and `testing` repositories from edge

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Delete previous configuration and enable `main`, `community` and `testing` repositories from edge.
```

```Dockerfile
RUN apk add -U --no-cache \
    alpine-conf \
    alpine-sdk \
    abuild \
    sudo \
    openssh-server \
    fish
RUN apk upgrade -a
RUN setup-apkcache /var/cache/apk
```

> Install the packages mentioned above, then run a upgrade and finally set up a cache for apk so it doesn't need to download the same package multiple times.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Install the packages mentioned above, then run an upgrade and finally set up a cache for apk so it doesn't download the same package multiple times in different `apk` invocations.
```

```Dockerfile
RUN /usr/bin/ssh-keygen -A
RUN printf "Port %%PORT%%\nListenAddress localhost\n" >> /etc/ssh/sshd_config
```

> First generate the hostkeys, otherwise SSH Daemon won't work, and then write some simple configuration options we need.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First generate the SSH hostkeys of the container and then write some simple configuration options we need.
```

> `Port` has a placeholder value that can be replaced on-the-fly, `ListenAddress` is only the host we are in.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`Port` has a placeholder value that can be replaced on-the-fly, `ListenAddress` sets what host `sshd` will listen on.
```

```Dockerfile
USER root

CMD ["/usr/sbin/sshd", "-D"]
```

> Force ourselves to run as `root` because the SSH Daemon requires it and set the command to run to start the SSH Daemon.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Force ourselves to run as `root` because the SSH Daemon requires it and set the command to run on startup to the SSH Daemon.
```

## Systemd service

> Now that we are done with the image to be run in podman, let's make use of systemd to manage the podman container to us.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now that we are done with the image to be run in podman, let's make use of systemd to manage the podman container for us.
```

## check running from within an `aports` tree
if [ "${PWD%*/$APORTSDIRNAME/*}" = "$PWD" ]; then
    die "Error: expecting to be run from within an aports tree!" \
        "It must be run under '$APORTSDIR'"
fi

# Generate new abuild key if not set
cmd="grep -sq '^PACKAGER_PRIVKEY=' $HOME/.abuild/abuild.conf || abuild-keygen -n -a"

# Copy keys over, we need this so packages will actually succeed when
# building (because of the signing stage), this is also required to
# install them
cmd="$cmd && sudo cp $HOME/.abuild/*.rsa.pub /etc/apk/keys"

case "$1" in
    checksum|unpack) cmd="$cmd; cd $APORTSDIR/${PWD#*/$APORTSDIRNAME/} && abuild $@" ;;
    *) cmd="$cmd && cd $APORTSDIR/${PWD#*/$APORTSDIRNAME/} && sudo apk upgrade -U -a && abuild $@" ;;
esac

if ! systemctl --user is-active --quiet alpine-ssh.service; then
    die "alpine-ssh.service must be active, run systemctl --user start alpine-ssh.service"
fi

run "$cmd"
```

Notice a few things:

- We run `apk upgrade -U -a` for any command other than `checksum` and `unpack`, the latter don't build anything and won't get maluses from having an outdated system.
- We use systemd to tell us if we are running the service

## Makefile

> to bring it all together and provide a nice workflow for building the image and installing the files lets write a makefile.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To bring it all together and provide a nice workflow for building the image and installing the files lets write a makefile.
```

> > Please don't use makefiles if you can help, use [meson][6] or redo (for simpliciy)

Reviewer: I don't think this remark is necessary

Author: Yes, I was just scared I might be passing the idea that using Makefiles is in any shape, way or form ok
